{:title "Going on a tangent"
 :layout :post
 :tags  ["regular expressions"]
 :toc true
 :navbar? true}

<!-- # Going on a tangent -->


You ever write a regular expression and then wonder how the heck it determine its matches? how does it go from such a terse syntax like `f[o]*` to a little machine that determines "YES, we're a match" or "NO, but oh well, there's more fish in the sea". 

Well I did, and I found a particularly nice algorithm for determining if a regular expression matches a given input string! The two reasons I chose this algorithm are:
1. It's very simple to understand, and the code expressing it is very short. 
2. It relies on the concept of the `derivative` of a regular expression, which I didn't even know existed. 


```clojure
    (defn regex-match
    [pattern data] 
    (if (empty? data)
        (regex-empty? (regex-empty pattern))
        (regex-match (derivative pattern (first data)) (rest data))))
```


The algorithm is simple to state: 
1. if the current string we're matching is empty (written $\epsilon$), and the regular expression we want to match against matches the empty string, then $s$ matches the regex $R$! Otherwise, it does not match. 
2. If the string is non-empty, then we perform two replacements + run again: 
    - the current string is replaced by the the current string without the first character (ex: $blue \rightarrow lue$)
    - the current regex is replaced by the **derivative** of $R$ with respect to the first character in $s$ (ex: $R \rightarrow D_b(R)$, since $b$ is the first character in $blue$). 

Ok, so what's this mysterious derivative? 

In short: it is the regular expression that matches the same stuff as $R$, assuming that a given character (ex: $b$) has **already been matched** by $R$. You can think of it as the "tail" of the regular expression. 

## Primer on regular expressions

Given: 
- a string $s$ to match, say "blue"
- a regular expression $R$ that will compute a match, say $b(l|o)u(e|t)(s)*$
    - recall: the $|$ operator is alternation (aka "choice"), and $*$ is iteration. The above regex could match $bout$, $blue$, $blot$, $boue$, as well as all of these variations ending in ANY number of $s$'s (ex: $bluessssssss$).
    - In addition to all those operations, we are doing one other sneaky one: concatenating several regexes together to form $R$! The characters $b$, $l$, $o$, $u$, $e$, $t$ are each very simple regexes that ONLY match that one character, and we can concat them together to form a regex that matches the first thing, then the second thing, then the third thing, etc.! 

then we want to determine if $s$ is recognized by $R$. To do this, we can slightly more formally define $R$ as representing the **set of all the strings** (drawn from a particular alphabet) **that it matches**: 
$$R := \\{  t | \text\{ $R$ matches t and \} t \in \Sigma \\}$$

### Example (where $\Sigma = \{a,b,c,d,e,...,z\}$) and the regular expression is $b(l|o)u(e|t)(s)*$:

$$
b(l|o)u(e|t)(s)* = \\{
    bout, blue, blot, boue, bouts, blues, blots, boues, boutss, bluess, blotss, bouess, boutsss, bluesss, blotsss, bouesss, ... 
    \\}
$$

We will also need a notion of the **empty** regex $\empty$, which is the regex that matches nothing: 

$$
    \empty := \text\{the empty set, confusingly also written \} \empty 
$$

This is **NOT THE SAME THING** from the regex that matches the empty string $\epsilon$. This regular expression is also written as $\epsilon$: 

$$
    \epsilon := \\{ \epsilon \\} 
$$

## The Brzozowski derivative

With this more concrete definition of a regex, then the **Brzozowski derivative** of $R$ with respect to a character $a$ is 

$$ 
    D_a(R) := \\{\text\{ \} b \text\{ \} | \text\{ \} ab \in R \text\{ \}\\}
$$

In other words, it is the regex that matches everything $R$ would have if $a$ had already been matched.

To compute this, Brzozowski came up with a recursive way of expressing $D_a(R)$: 

$$D_a(\empty) = \empty$$
$$D_a(\epsilon) = \empty$$
$$D_a(a) = \epsilon $$
$$D_a(a') = \empty \text\{ if \} a \neq a' $$
$$D_a(R_1 R_2) = δ(R_1) D_a(R_2) \text\{ \}  | \text\{ \} D_a(R_1) \text\{ \}  R_2 $$ 
$$D_a(R_1 \text\{ \} | \text\{ \}  R_2) = D_a(R_1)\text\{ \} | \text\{ \} D_a(R_2)$$
$$D_a(R*) = D_a(R) R*$$

Note that the "product" rule also uses a function $\delta$. This function is a helper, and it just determines if its argument accepts the empty string pattern $\epsilon$. If it doesn't, then it returns the null pattern $\empty$: 

$$\delta(\empty) = \empty$$
$$\delta(\epsilon) = \epsilon$$
$$\delta(a) = \empty$$
$$\delta(R_1 R_2) = \delta(R_1)\delta(R_2)$$
$$\delta(R_1 \text\{ \} | \text\{ \} R_2) =\delta(R_1) \text\{ \} | \text\{ \} \delta(R_2) $$
$$\delta(R *) = \epsilon$$


This is a lot of rules, and they are best understood through some examples, so let's get on with that. 

-------------------------------------
### Example: $R = do(g|t)$, $s = dog$ 

Let's try and compute $D_d(R)$ to get a feel for how to apply the rules above.

First we have to apply the product rule, since we have a concatenation of 3 regexes. 

$$
    D_d(do(g|t)) = \delta(d) D_d(o(g|t)) \text\{ \} | \text\{ \} D_d(d) \text\{ \}  (o(g|t))
$$

The RHS of the alternation is the more imporant piece, so let's tackle that first: 

$$
    D_d(d) \text\{ \}  (o(g|t)) = \epsilon \text\{ \} (o(g|t)) = o(g|t)
$$

On the LHS of the |: 

$$
    \delta(d) D_d(o(g|t)) \text\{ \} = \empty \text\{ \} D_d(o(g|t)) = \empty
$$

because **NO** strings are accepted by $\empty$, so if it appears at the beginning of a concatenation like it does here, it overrules any matches that may have happened in the rest of the regex. 

Putting the LHS + RHS together, we find that

$$
    D_d(do(g|t)) = o(g|t) \text\{ \} | \text\{ \} \empty = o(g|t)
$$

This is exactly the *subset* of strings in the set represented by $do(g|t)$ 
that are suffixes of $d$!

-------------------------------


## Why is this thing called a derivative?

Every sufficiently nice function can be approximated by its [Taylor series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taylor_series), and in some cases, the function is *exactly* equal to its infinite Taylor series. 

In other words, the function's derivatives carry information about the original function, and bundling them together 
in the above sense represents the behavior of the function.

$$
    f(a) \approx \sum_\{ n=0 \}^\infty \text\{ (n-th derivative of f at a) \} * g(x, a, n)
$$
where $g(x, a, n)$ is some function g that depends on $x,a,n$. 


In his [original 1964 paper](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/321239.321249), Brzozowski showed that every regular expression has a similar representation in terms of its derivatives. **Note:** his notation for alternation is $+$, so 
when you look at the following, read the sums as alternations of regexes.

$$ 
    \text{Every regular expression R can be written as  \} R = \delta(R) + \sum_\{ a \in \Sigma \} aD_a(R)
$$ 

This is sort of like an analogue of Taylor's theorem, but for regexes! A regex is "approximated" in the above sense by its derivatives. They give subsets of the total set of matches that the regex $R$ yields, and as you add more and more of those together via $|$, you gather enough options to eventually reconstruct the original regex.

In fact, he shows that over a fixed alphabet $\sigma$, every regex $R$ only has **finitely many unique derivatives $d_R$**. He terms these $R$'s *characteristic derivatives*. So, most of the terms in the above representation can be ignored. If we want, we can express $R$ purely in terms of an alternation of its characteristic derivatives. 


## Back to the algorithm

With the above intution in hand, we can understand a little better why the matching algorithm works. If a regular expression is represented by its derivatives and we iteratively apply the derivative to $R$ (w.r.t. the current character we are looking at in the string $s$), then we should be construcing a descending chain of subsets ($S_1 \subseteq S2 \subseteq S3 \subseteq ... $) of strings in our alphabet $\Sigma$, which should end in an empty set **exactly** when we run out of characters in $s$. 

I ported [Matt Might's implementation](https://matt.might.net/articles/implementation-of-regular-expression-matching-in-scheme-with-derivatives/) to Clojure [here](https://github.com/cantwellnc/parsing-with-derivatives), and it works pretty well! I'd highly recommend going and playing with that code to get a feel for how the parsing algorithm works.

The performance of the naive implementation is not great, but it is a truly beautiful and simple algorithm to understand once you get what the Brzozowski derivative does to a regex.


## More

- In the original paper, he defines the derivative for **any** boolean connective $f(P,Q)$, not just alternation. The value of $\delta$ on $f$ might be more complicated to derive, but it is possible in terms of other basic connectives. He gives many examples of what f could be: intersection, set complement, xor, etc. 
- The original paper also goes into how to construct state machines that accept strings from $R$ using its characteristic derivatives. If you want more info on how this works, I'll probably be writing a follow-up post on how this works too. 